A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Anodization
Aluminum oxide
Fast Fourier transform
Surface morphology
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)

A B S T R A C T

Nanoporous alumina ﬁlms were synthesized on commercial grade aluminum substrates using single-step
anodization technique in 0.3 M phosphoric acid at room temperature. Eﬀect of applied voltage (100–130 V) on
surface characteristics of anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) ﬁlm was investigated. Surface topography parameters
and regularity ratio of nanopores arrangement were characterized using power spectral density (PSD) and fast
Fourier transform (FFT) proﬁles. While DC anodization suﬀered from ﬁlament-like cavities at 130 V owing to
thermally enhanced dissolution of oxide, AC anodization produced localized ﬂower-like morphology for all the
applied voltages. The intensity of localized ﬂower-like morphology was increased monotonically with applied
voltage. Evolution of ﬂower-like morphology was discussed on the basis of Pashchanka-Schneider model.

1. Introduction

Nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) has a tremendous
potential in large spectrum of nano-scale engineering applications
ranging from template-assisted synthesis of nanowires to MEMS/
NEMS based tribology devices [1–4]. Numerous eﬀorts have been made
in the literature to understand the mechanism of pattern formation
during aluminum anodization [5–10]. The ﬁeld-assisted dissolution
model [5–9] suggests that oxide ﬁlm growth occurs at the metal/oxide
interface owing to inward migration of O2−ions across the barrier layer
and the pores are formed mainly at the oxide/electrolyte interface due
to electric ﬁeld-accelerated dissolution of anodic alumina accompanied
by outward migration of Al3+ ions into the electrolyte. The stress-
driven viscous ﬂow model [10–12] claims that nanopores are generated
mainly by ﬂow of material from the pore bases to the cell walls and this
material displacement is primarily facilitated by plasticity of the oxide
ﬁlm. The oxygen bubble model [13–15] emphasizes that the evolution
of O2 occurs with the formation of oxide ﬁlm, and whether or not this
oxide ﬁlm has been transformed from barrier type to porous type, can
be determined by observing whether or not O2 separates out of the bulk
oxide ﬁlm. Later, Pashchanka et al [16–18] proposed the novel
theoretical model for nanoporous pattern formation by adopting the
analogy of Rayleigh-Bernard convection cells. While the temperature
gradient is the driving for Rayleigh-Bernard convection cells, the
applied voltage is considered as a driving force for pattern formation
in porous oxide ﬁlm [16]. However, it is very diﬃcult to provide the
uniﬁed theory describing all the aspects of random experimental
observations during aluminum anodization. Nevertheless, Pashchan-ka-Schneider model describes the wide range of unexplained experi-
mental observations for the formation of equal-sized hexagonally
ordered pores [16].

The self-ordering of nanopores in anodized aluminium oxide (AAO)
ﬁlm is governed by several anodization parameters such as applied
voltage [19], time [20], temperatures [20] and pH [21], concentration
[21], conductivity, viscosity [22] and composition [23] of the applied
electrolyte. Pashchanka et al [16] proposed an empirical relationship
between these anodization parameters as follows:

(1) - формула

Where P is the porosity number or criterion for the appearance of
self-organized nanopores (found experimentally to be around 0.057 for
the majority of the widely used electrolytes), Qav is the average charge
of supporting electrolyte anions, 10 −pH is the proton concentration, ΔU
is the applied voltage, η is the dynamic viscosity, σ is the speciﬁc
electrical conductivity and C is the acid concentration. The Eq. (1)
demonstrates that the self-ordering voltage mainly depends upon the
applied electrolyte. For instance, the lower voltages (15–30 V) are
preferred for the less viscous solutions of sulfuric acid and oxalic acid
while the higher voltages (160–195 V) for a viscous phosphoric acid
[16]. Stepniowski et al [20] investigated the inﬂuence of time and
temperature on the arrangement of alumina nanopores. They observed
that the better ordering of alumina nanopores occurs in second-step
anodization if ﬁrst-step anodization is performed for longer duration
owing to better pre-texturing of the aluminum beneath the pore
bottoms, at the metal–oxide interface and the applied temperature
has no eﬀect on ordering of nanopores for a short time anodization.
Stepniowski et al [21] mentioned that interpore distance between
nanopores linearly scales with applied voltage while it increases
exponentially with molar fraction of chromic acid electrolyte.

Most researchers synthesized self-organized nanoporous aluminum
oxide ﬁlms by utilizing the combination of high purity aluminum
substrate and low temperatures (0-10 °C) by using DC anodization
[24–27]. This combination is generally preferred as the existence of any
chemical impurities shall not allow sustainable growth of oxide ﬁlm
owing to thermally enhanced dissolution and dielectric breakdown [28]
at the metal-oxide interface during DC anodization. However, there has
been signiﬁcant interest among the aluminum industry for alternating
current (AC) and pulsed current anodization to fabricate nanoporous
AAO ﬁlms on commercial grade Al-alloys and low purity aluminum
substrates under ambient environment [29–33]. De Graeve et al [29]
investigated the contribution of cathodic process during AC anodization
of commercial Al-alloys, and observed that cathodic hydrogen gas
evolution develops high cathodic potential at ﬂaw sites tending to
reduce the eﬃciency of ﬁlm formation. In recent years, pulsed current
techniques seem to be gaining attraction since it overcomes most of the
disadvantages (thermally enhanced dissolution of DC anodized ﬁlm,
limited thickness, and inferiority in the quality of AC anodized ﬁlm)
associated with conventional DC and AC anodization techniques. Lee
et al [31] proposed pulse anodization approach that combines the
advantages of mild anodization (formation of self-ordered nanopores)
and hard anodization (high production rate). Law et al [32] tailored the
optical properties of AAO photonic crystals by controlling the various
anodization parameters precisely using sawtooth-like pulse anodiza-
tion. Chung et al [33,34] proposed the novel hybrid pulse anodization
technique to synthesize AAO ﬁlms on commercial grade purity Al
substrates (99%) at room temperature condition itself. The basic idea
behind this hybrid pulse approach was to suppress any temperature rise
by facilitating the cooling of electrolyte during the pulse-oﬀperiod. The
incorporation of cathodic cycle using alternating current may reduce
the dissolution tendency of oxide layer at impurity sites to the certain
extent. It is noted that certain engineering applications such as
hydrogen gas storage [35,36], catalysis [37,38], electrochemical sen-
sing [39] , membrane synthesis [40,41] and corrosion protection
coatings [21,42,43] shall not need any self-organized or well-ordered
nanopores. Moreover, AC anodization has distinct practical advantages
relative to DC anodization. For instance, it is possible to obtain
anodization for two diﬀerent aluminum substrates at the same time
during AC anodization. AC anodization also minimizes the necessity for
pretreatment of the aluminum substrates and agitation of anodizing
electrolyte owing to hydrogen gas evolution during cathodic cycle. In
fact, AC anodization can be considered as one of the simplest, economic
and aﬀordable industrial techniques in the mass production of corro-
sion protection coatings for large-scale aluminum sheet and food
packaging applications [29]. Despite the mechanism of nanoporous
oxide formation during AC anodization is similar to that of DC
anodization; the characteristics of ﬁlm morphology, surface topography
and regularity ratio of poorly arranged nanopores may be varied as a
function of applied voltage during AC and DC anodization. Further-
more, the nature of ﬁlm morphology and surface topography play
decisive role in determining the mechanical and frictional behavior of
AAO ﬁlms for surface engineering related applications [44–46]. Main
objective of the present study was to understand the evolution of ﬁlm
morphology, surface topography and regularity ratio of poorly arranged
alumina nanopores obtained on commercial grade Al substrates by
varying applied voltage (100–130 V) using single-step DC and AC
anodization.

2. Experimental methods

Commercial grade Al substrates of 99.0% purity were utilized to
fabricate nanoporous aluminium oxide ﬁlms by single-step anodization.
Firstly, the surface area of Al specimens (15 mm x 15 mm x 0.25 mm)
was coated with an insulative polymer ﬁlm after leaving an exposed
area of 1 cm² for anodization process. Al specimens were then subjected
to chemical polishing in 1 M solution of NaOH for two min in order to
achieve the mirror-like surface ﬁnish. Subsequently, single-step D.C.
and A.C. anodization were performed on these polished Al substrates in
0.3 M phosphoric acid solution at a constant applied voltage of 100,
110, 120 and 130 V for 15 min. DC-current was supplied from DC
power source (Zeal-Tech instrument, Model No.9211, India) while AC-
current was supplied from single phase auto transformer (Crown
Instrument, Model No.C10ASPT, India). All the anodization experi-
ments were performed at room temperature (30–35 °C) and water bath
was used as a heat sinking source during anodization. The presence of
thin whitish gray layer on Al substrates conﬁrmed the formation of AAO
ﬁlms. Three specimens were prepared for each set of process para-
meters to ensure repeatability in the experimental data. It should be
kept in mind that single-step anodization results in the formation of
poorly arranged nanopores, unlike two-step anodization which leads to
the formation of well-ordered hexagonal nanopores. Surface character-
istics of AAO ﬁlms fabricated on commercial grade aluminum sub-
strates were analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL
JSM-6610LV, Japan), and atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker
Multimode 8, USA) respectively. Power spectral density (PSD) and
Fast Fourier transforms (FFT) proﬁles were derived from AFM images
and SEM micrographs in order to evaluate the surface topography
parameters and regularity ratio of pore arrangement for all the AAO
ﬁlms, synthesized at various D.C. and A.C. voltages.

3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 depicts the variation of current as a function of time for both
AC and DC anodization. In typical AC anodization, the aluminum
specimen serves as an anode for every 0.01 s (at a given frequency of
50 Hz) and for the same consecutive period, it acts as a cathode due to
polarity shift in the voltage. However, aluminum remains as anodic
material during the entire period for the case of DC anodization. Fig. 2
shows the SEM micrographs which represent the evolution of surface
morphology of anodized specimens performed by DC and AC anodiza-
tion techniques. It is evident that the nature of surface morphology is
more or less appeared to be similar at 100 V (compare Fig. 2(a) and
(b)). On the contrary, the ﬁlament-like cavities are observed for DC
anodized specimen at 130 V as seen in Fig. 2(c). The existence of
ﬁlament-like cavities could be associated with the thermally enhanced
dissolution of oxide ﬁlm. When impurities accommodated within
commercial grade aluminum are subjected to high electrical resistivity,
it causes sudden temperature rise of an electrolyte which eventually
leading to induce thermally enhanced dissolution of oxide at the
electrolyte/anode interface [32] . It is well-known fact that Joule's
heat linearly scales with an applied voltage during anodization. There-
fore, when applied voltage approaches 130 V, anodized specimen may
experience the maximum Joule's heat within the electrolyte. This
demonstrates that DC mode exhibits thermally enhanced dissolution
of oxide ﬁlm at impurity sites after certain amount of Joule's heat is
achieved and this happens only at 130 V. However, there is no evidence
of thermally enhanced dissolution of oxide ﬁlm for the case of AC
anodization at any applied voltage in the present work. It is believed
that the introduction of cathodic cycle may suppress the abrupt rise in
Joule's heat within the electrolytic medium. Most importantly, it can be
seen that AC anodization represents the evolution of localized ﬂower-
like morphology over the anodized surface at 130 V (Fig. 2(d)). The
summary of important geometrical parameters which were quantiﬁed
after anodization is provided in Table 1. The measured pore diameters
of nanopores for AC as well as DC anodization from SEM micrographs
are found to be in the range of 90–100 nm except the specimen
anodized at 130 V during DC anodization (Table 1). The existence of
higher pore diameter (278 nm) for DC anodization performed at 130 V
can be ascribed to the thermally enhanced dissolution owing to higher
amount of Joule's heat.

Fig. 1. Variation of current as a function of time for DC and AC anodization process.

Fig. 2. Surface morphologies of anodized commercial grade aluminum specimens, (a) & (b) DC & AC anodization performed at 100 V; (c) & (d) DC & AC anodization performed at 130 V
respectively.

Table 1
Summary of important geometrical parameters for DC and AC anodized ﬁlms.

Fig. 3 depicts the low-resolution SEM images of nanoporous
structures of AAO ﬁlms obtained using AC anodization under diﬀerent
Voltage Pore diameter, nm RMS roughness, nm Average regularity ratio
voltages. It can be seen that the intensity of localized ﬂower-like
morphology increases monotonically with increasing applied voltage.
At this moment, it is worthwhile to understand the mechanism of
nanoporous oxide formation in accordance with Pashchanka-Schneider
model [16] during DC anodization as follows; Firstly, hydrated anions
are attracted towards aluminium during anodic cycle. These hydrated
anions have a shell of water molecules around them. Aluminium reacts
with water molecules to form colloidal alumina particles along with
generation of protons which tends to lower the pH locally near the
aluminium surface according to the following equation [16];

Fig. 3. SEM micrographs of anodized commercial grade aluminum samples performed by AC anodization at diﬀerent voltages (a) 100 V, (b) 110 V, (c) 120 V, and (d) 130 V.

These colloidal alumina particles cannot precipitate directly on
aluminium substrate owing to low pH. However, at a certain distance
away from the working electrode, pH is locally increased because of the
attracted OH− ions from the electrolyte [16]. The negative charge is
accumulated near the anode due to the migration of hydrated anions
towards the aluminum surface [16]. Each new migrating hydrated
anion experiences the repulsion forces from the accumulated charge
along with the attraction by the electromagnetic force [16].

Once the critical concentration gradient of hydrated anions is
attained, they start to move in the opposite direction due to the
conventional diﬀusion process [16]. This diﬀusion decreases the
accumulation of negative charge near the anode and facilities the
delivery of newly hydrated anions to participate in the chemical
reaction as mentioned in the Eq. (2). The competition between two
driving forces (electromagnetic attraction and diﬀusion of hydrated
anions) creates concentration and current ﬂuctuations. This scenario
activates steady-state exchange of anions and ionic currents akin to
convective currents for Rayleigh-Bernard cells [16].

By steady-state exchange of anions, the mobile colloidal alumina
particles are escaped away from the aluminum surface and migrate to
the region where there exists a scarcity of H+ ions and get neutralized
with OH−ions attracted from the electrolyte [16]. On this region, pH
increases locally. Therefore, these colloidal alumina particles can now
be able to coagulate and precipitate above the aluminum substrate in
order to form an inter-pore wall [16]. Once the inter-pore wall is
formed, it is lifted up by the newly colloidal particles from below and
leading to the formation of nanoporous pattern [16]. According to
Pashchanka-Schneider model [16], the applied voltage should be
around 160 V to obtain any self-ordering of alumina nanopores in
phosphoric acid electrolyte. Most of the experimental observations also
suggest that self-ordering voltage should be in the range of 160–195 V
for the case of 0.3 M phosphoric acid [16]. Since the range of applied
voltage in the present work lies between 100–130 V, the self-ordering of
alumina nanopores has not been expected. In fact, SEM examination
conﬁrms that alumina nanopores are not well-organized or poorly
arranged irrespective of the applied voltage during AC anodization as
well as DC anodization.

Fig. 4 illustrates the schematic model for the formation of ﬂower-
like morphology on the basis of Pashchanka-Schneider model [16].
Despite this model is mainly suggested for DC anodization, it can be
utilized to explain how localized ﬂower-like morphology emerges over
the free surface of AAO ﬁlm during AC anodization. Firstly, the
mechanism of inter-pore wall generation is caused by the steady-state
exchange of the ions during anodic cycle of AC anodization as described
in Pashchanka-Schneider model. Later, the porous oxide formation is
hindered due to shift in polarity by the introduction of cathodic cycle
during AC anodization. In the mean time, there is an evolution of
hydrogen gas at preferential sites having majority of ﬂaws or impurities
[5]. Furthermore, attractions of hydronium ions towards the cathode
tending to lower the pH locally near the aluminium substrate. There-
fore, the alumina particles those were produced during previous anodic
cycle did not get a chance to coagulate and remain to be in the colloidal
state. This evolving hydrogen gas pushes away these mobile colloidal
alumina particles out of the bulk oxide ﬁlm. After several numbers of
anodic and cathodic cycles, those alumina particles which were pushed
outside of the bulk porous oxide ﬁlm are still in the colloidal state
owing to low pH in the remote electrolyte. Once, we turn oﬀ the AC
power supply, the production of both H+ and hydrogen gas stops and
pH is raised locally in this surface region. This favors the settling of
colloidal alumina particles which eventually results in the emergence of
ﬂower-like morphology over the free surface of the bulk porous oxide
ﬁlm. It should be noted that the magnitude of pushing, and settling of
these colloidal alumina particles dictate the intensity of ﬂower-like
morphology. The trend in the intensity of localized ﬂower-like mor-
phology demonstrates that the magnitude of pushing and settling of
colloidal alumina particles increases with increasing of applied voltage.
This may be ascribed to the evolution of larger amount of hydrogen gas
during AC anodization.

Fig. 4. A schematic mode illustrates the formation of ﬂower-like morphology during AC Anodization in accordance with Pashchanka-Schneider model [16].

3D AFM images contrast the diﬀerence in surface roughness
between DC and AC mode anodized at similar applied voltage of
130 V (compare Fig. 5(a) and (b)). Fig. 5(c) depicts the variation of
(RMS, root mean square) roughness as a function of applied voltage for
both DC and AC anodization. It can be seen that RMS roughness values
remain constant until 120 V and reached its maximum value at 130 V
during DC anodization, whereas roughness values vary moderately for
the case of AC anodization. This abrupt increase in RMS roughness
value can be associated with thermally enhanced dissolution. It is
pertinent to mention that RMS roughness values do not truly represent
the exact surface topographic variations that existed in anodized
samples as roughness parameter is highly sensitive to the length scale
of measurement; hence we preferred to obtain power spectral density
(PSD) proﬁle by using atomic force microscopic technique [47].
Fig 6(a) and (b) show the power spectral density spectra of anodized
samples performed at DC and AC mode for diﬀerent voltages. It is well-
documented that the slope of high-frequency domain refers to local
roughness or fractal components, and power intensity at low-frequency
domain gives the information related to the strength of the aggregates
or global roughness. On the high-frequency domain, it can be observed
that local roughness increases slightly with the applied voltage for the
case of AC anodization. However, roughness remains almost constant in
DC anodized specimen except at 130 V where thermally enhanced
dissolution accelerates. The directional ﬂow of ions remains constant
during DC anodization where one can expect the constant roughness
proﬁle for DC anodized specimen. However, the uni-directional ﬂow of
ions is often changed or interrupted for the case of AC anodization
owing to shift in the polarity for every 0.01 s.

Fig. 5. 3D-AFM based surface topographies of anodized samples performed at 130 V. (a) DC mode; (b) AC mode and (c) estimated RMS roughness of anodized samples as a function of
applied voltage in DC and AC modes.

Fig. 6. Power spectral density proﬁles of anodized samples derived from AFM images for (a) DC and (b) AC modes of anodization.

Fig. 7 represents typical radial averages of fast Fourier transform
(FFT) proﬁles obtained from SEM images of DC and AC anodized
specimen. The radial average of FFT proﬁles of alumina nanopores were
obtained by using a methodology adopted by Wojciech et al [48] . FFT
proﬁle was generated from SEM micrographs using WSxM software
[49,50]. It is noted that physical meaning of radial average is nothing
but a distribution of interpore distance in the inversed space. The
intensity of FFT proﬁle refers to the regularity of pore arrangement and
FFT radius measures the average inter-pore distance. The width of full
intensity at half of its height can be related to uniformity in the
distribution of low-ordered nanopores. Regularity ratio of nanoporous
arrangement within alumina ﬁlms can be estimated from the radial
average of FFT proﬁle according to the following equation;

формула

where: n is number of pores, H is the maximum intensity of the FFT
radial average, S is analyzed surface area and width of the radial
average at half of the maximum intensity from FFT proﬁle. The lowest
regularity ratio of nanopores was registered for the DC mode at 130 V.
This can be associated with the thermally enhanced dissolution of oxide
as mentioned earlier. It is evident that regularity ratio of nanoporous
arrangement and uniformity of nanopores for AC anodized samples are
signiﬁcantly higher than that for DC anodized specimens at similar
applied voltages (see Fig. 7 and Table. 1). During AC anodization
process, hydrogen/oxygen gases which evolved during the cathodic/
anodic cycles are being expected to impose isotropic pressure within
the alumina nanopores which eventually tending to produce better
regularity ratio of nanoporous arrangement. This hypothesis appears to
be consistent with oxygen bubble eﬀect which imparts certain level of
isotropic pressure to the cell walls of oxide ﬁlm and brings some level of
ordered nanoporous arrangement [12]. Chu et al [13] observed
experimentally that surface morphology of anodizing front can be
composed of traces of gas pores after SEM examination. Furthermore,
Zaraska et al [14] pointed out that the complete reorganization of
nanopores in the phosphoric acid electrolyte can be attributed to the
oxygen gas evolution occurring during anodization. In accordance with
Pashchanka-Schneider model [16], self-ordering voltage is 160 V for
phosphoric acid as mentioned earlier. In the present work, ordering of
porous arrangement may enhance with increasing of voltage as voltage
diﬀerence provides the driving force for pattern formation [16]. For
instance, it can be seen that regularity ratio of porous arrangement
increases steadily from 2.9 to 4.9 when voltage is increased from 100 to
130 V as mentioned in Table 1. Stepniowski et al [48] also mentioned
that greater the applied voltage and temperature, better the regularity
ratio of nanoporous arrangement during aluminum anodization.
Although debate continues on various existing theoretical models, the
evolution of ﬂower-like morphology can be explained successfully by
Pashchanka-Schneider model [16]. The trend in the regularity ratio of
nanopores for AC anodized specimen appears to be quite consistent
with oxygen bubble eﬀect [12]. This means that surface morphology of
nanoporous arrangement during AC anodization may be determined by
synergism between oxygen bubble eﬀect, and Rayleigh convective cells
in accordance with Pashchanka-Schneider model [16].

Fig. 7. Fast Fourier transforms proﬁles derived from SEM images for commercial grade
aluminum anodized using DC and AC modes.

4. Conclusions

1. No signiﬁcant change in surface morphological features was ob-
served until 120 V irrespective of the polarity or applied voltages.
However, DC anodization suﬀered from ﬁlament-like cavities with
unusual surface roughness at 130 V. This can be ascribed with
thermally enhanced dissolution of oxide at impurity or defect sites.

2. Nanoporous AAO ﬁlms experienced localized ﬂower-like morphol-
ogy for all the applied voltages during AC anodization. Evolution of
ﬂower-like morphology can be explained successfully by
Pashchanka-Schneider model.

3. The regularity ratio of nanoporous arrangement was found to be
superior during AC anodization when compared to DC anodization.
This could be associated with oxygen bubble eﬀect which brings
some level of ordering. This demonstrates that the mechanism of
nanoporous pattern formation is primarily controlled by the combi-
nation between oxygen bubble eﬀect and Rayleigh convective cells
during AC anodization.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to express their gratitude for the technical
support provided by Mr. Dilbagh Singh, and Mr. Ram Kumar during the
entire course of experimentation.
##
References

[1] A.M.M. Jani, D. Losic, N.H. Voelcker, Nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide:
advances in surface engineering and emerging applications, Prog. Mater. Sci. 58
(2013) 636–704.
[2] W. Yang, C. Cui, Q. Liu, B. Cao, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, Fabrication and magnetic
properties of Sm2Co17 and Sm2Co17 /Fe7 Co3 magnetic nanowires via AAO
templates, J. Crystal Growth 399 (2014) 1–6.
[3] S.W. Hong, J. Bae, B. Koo, Y.B. Kim, High-performance ultra-thin ﬁlm solid oxide
fuel cell using anodized-aluminum-oxide supporting structure, Electrochem. Comm.
47 (2014) 1–4.
[4] B. Kang, U. Yeo, K. Yoo, Anodized aluminum oxide-based capacitance sensors for
the direct detection of DNA hybridization, Biosens. Bioelectron. 25 (2010)
1592–1596.
[5] H. Masuda, K. Fukuda, Ordered metal nanohole arrays made by a two-step
replication of honeycomb structures of anodic alumina, Science 268 (1995)
1466–1468.
[6] H. Masuda, F. Hasegawa, S. Ono, Self-ordering of cell arrangement of anodic porous
alumina formed in sulfuric acid solution, J. Electrochem. Soc. 144 (1997)
L127–L129.
[7] H. Masuda, K. Yada, A. Osaka, Self-ordering of cell conﬁguration of anodic porous
alumina with large-size pores in phosphoric acid solution, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37
(1998) L1340–L1342.
[8] J. Oh, C.V. Thompson, The role of electric ﬁeld in pore formation during aluminum
anodization, Electrochem. Acta 56 (2001) 4044–4051.
[9] H. Wu, K.R. Herbert, Electrochemical transients during the initial moments of
anodic oxidation of aluminium, Electrochim. Acta 47 (2002) 1373–1383.

[10] G.K. Singh, A.A. Golovin, I.S. Aranson, Formation of self-organized nanoscale
porous structures in anodic aluminum oxide, Phy. Rev: B 73 (2006) 2054.
[11] J.E. Houser, K.R. Hebert, The role of viscous ﬂow of oxide in the growth of self-
ordered porous anodic alumina ﬁlms, Nat. Mater 8 (2008) 415–420.
[12] S.J. Garcia-Vergara, P. Skeldon, G.E. Thompson, H. Habazaki, A ﬂow model of
porous anodic ﬁlm growth on aluminium, Electrochim. Acta. 52 (2006) 681–687.
[13] X.F. Zhu, D.D. Li, Y. Song, Y.H. Xiao. The study on oxygen bubbles of anodic
alumina based on high purity aluminum, Mater. Lett. 59 (2005) 3160–3163.
[14] L. Zaraska, A. Brudzisz, E. Wierzbicka, G.D. Sulka, The eﬀect of electrolyte change
on the morphology and degree of nanopore order of porous alumina formed by two-
step anodization, Electro Chemica. Acta 198 (2016) 259–267.
[15] V. Cheim Chu, H. Li, H. Kim, J.M. Seo, Eﬀect of bubble gas on the formation of self-
organized pore arrays in anodic aluminium oxide, J. Kor. Phy. Soc. 54 (2009)
2415–2419.
[16] M. Pashchanka, J.J. Schneider, Origin of self-organisation in porous anodic alumina
ﬁlms derived from analogy with Rayleigh–Bénard convection cells, J. Mater. Chem.
21 (2011) 18761.
[17] M. Pashchanka, J.J. Schneider, Self-ordering regimes of porous anodic alumina
layers formed in highly diluted oxalic acid electrolyte”, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18
(2016) 6946–6953.
[18] M. Pashchanka, J.J. Schneider, Evidence for electrohydrodynamic convection as a
source of spontaneous self-ordering in porous anodic alumina ﬁlms, Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 18 (2016) 6946–6953.
[19] A.M. Abd-Elnaiem, A. Gaber, Parametric Study on the anodization of pure
aluminum thin ﬁlm used in fabricating nano-pores template, Int. J. Electrochem.
Sci. 8 (2013) 9741–9751.
[20] W.J. Stępniowskia, A. Nowak-Stępniowskab, A. Preszc, T. Czujkoa, R.A. Varind, The
eﬀects of time and temperature on the arrangement of anodic aluminum oxide
nanopores, Mater. Character. 91 (2014) 1–9.
[21] S.T. Abrahami, T. Hauﬀman, J.M.M. de Kok, H. Terryn, J.M.C. Mol, The role of
acid-base properties in the interactions across the oxide-primer interface in aero-
space applications, Surf. Interface Anal. 48 (2016) 712–720.
[22] W.J. Stȩpniowski, D. Forbot, M. Norek, M. Michalska-Domańska, A. Król, The
impact of viscosity of the electrolyte on the formation of nanoporous anodic
aluminum oxide, Electrochim. Acta. 133 (2014) 57–64.
[23] W.J. Stȩpniowski, M. Moneta, M. Norek, M. Michalska-Domańska, A. Scarpellini,
M. Salerno, The inﬂuence of electrolyte composition on the growth of nanoporous
anodic alumina, Electrochim. Acta. 211 (2016) 453–460.
[24] A.P. Li, F. Muller, A. Birner, K. Nielsch, U. Gosele, Hexagonal pore arrays with a
50–420 nm interpore distance formed by self-organization in anodic alumina, J.
Appl. Phys. 84 (11) (1998) 6023–6026.
[25] F. Nasirpouri, M. Abdollahzadeh, M.J. Almasi, N. Parvini-Ahmadi, A comparison
between self-ordering of nanopores in aluminum oxide ﬁlms achieved by two- and
three-step anodic oxidation, Curr. Appl. Phys. 9 (2009) S91–S94.
[26] M. Ghorbani, F. Nasirpouri, A. Irajizad, A. Saedi, On the growth sequence of highly
ordered nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide, Mater. Design 27 (2006) 983–988.
[27] F. Li, L. Zhang, R.M. Metzger, On the growth of highly ordered pores in anodized
aluminum oxide, Chem. Mater. 10 (1998) 2470–2480.
[28] H.J. De Wit, C. Wijenberg, C. Crevecoeur, The dielectric breakdown of Anodic
Aluminum Oxide, J. Electrochem. Soc. 123 (1976) 1479–1486.
[29] I. De Graeve, H. Terryn, G.E. Thompson, AC-anodising of aluminium: Contribution
to electrical and eﬃciency study, Electrochem. Acta 52 (2006) 1127–1134.
[30] Li Lingchuan, AC anodization of aluminum, electrodeposition of nickel and optical
property examination, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 64 (3) (2000) 279–289.
[31] W. Lee, K. Schwirn, M. Steinhart, E. Pippel, R. Scholz, U. Gösele, Structural
engineering of nanoporous anodic aluminium oxide by pulse anodization of

aluminium, Nat. Nanotechnol. 3 (2008) 234–239.
[32] C.S. Law, A. Santos, M. Nemati, D. Losic, Structural engineering of nanoporous
anodic alumina phtonic crystals by sawtooth-like pulse anodization,Appl, Mater.
Interf. 8 (2016) 13542–13554.
[33] C.K. Chung, W.T. Chang, M.W. Liao, H.C. Chang, Improvement of pore distribution
uniformity of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide with pulse reverse voltage on
low-and-high-purity aluminum foils, Mater. Lett. 88 (2012) 104–107.
[34] CK Chung, RX Zhou, TY Liu, WT Chang, Hybrid pulse anodization for the
fabrication of porous anodic alumina ﬁlms from commercial purity (99%)
aluminum at room temperature, Nanotech 20 (2009) 055301.
[35] M. Norek, W.J. Stȩpniowski, M. Polanski, D. Zasada, Z. Bojar, J. Bystrzycki, A
comparative study on the hydrogen absorption of thin ﬁlms at room temperature
deposited on non-porous glass substrate and nano-porous anodic aluminum oxide
(AAO) template, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 36 (2011) 11777–11784.
[36] M. Norek, W.J. Stȩpniowski, D. Zasada, K. Karczewski, J. Bystrzycki, Z. Bojar, H2
absorption at ambient conditions by anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) pattern-
transferred Pd nanotubes occluded by Mg nanoparticles, Mater. Chem. Phys. 133
(2012) 376–382.
[37] A. Brzózka, D. Szeliga, E. Kurowska-Tabor, G.D. Sulka, Synthesis of copper
nanocone array electrodes and its electrocatalytic properties toward hydrogen
peroxide reduction, Mater. Lett. 174 (2016) 66–70.
[38] A. Brzózka, A. Jeleń, A.M. Brudzisz, M.M. Marzec, G.D. Sulka, Electrocatalytic
reduction of chloroform at nanostructured silver electrodes, Electrochim. Acta. 225
(2017) 574–583.
[39] E. Kurowska, A. Brzózka, M. Jarosz, G.D. Sulka, M. Jaskuła, Silver nanowire array
sensor for sensitive and rapid detection of H2O2, Electrochim. Acta. 104 (2013)
439–447.
[40] T. Masuda, H. Asoh, S. Haraguchi, S. Ono, Nanoporous alpha;-alumina membrane
prepared by anodizing and heat treatment, Electrochemistry 82 (2014) 448–455.
[41] T. Masuda, H. Asoh, S. Haraguchi, S. Ono, Fabrication and characterization of single
phase α-alumina membranes with tunable pore diameters, Materials 8 (2015)
1350–1368 (Basel).
[42] M.A. van Put, S.T. Abrahami, O. Elisseeva, J.M.M. de Kok, J.M.C. Mol, H. Terryn,
Potentiodynamic anodizing of aluminum alloys in Cr(VI)-free electrolytes, Surf.
Interface Anal. 48 (2016) 946–952.
[43] S.T. Abrahami, T. Hauﬀman, J.M.M. De Kok, J.M.C. Mol, H. Terryn, XPS analysis of
the surface chemistry and interfacial bonding of barrier-type Cr(VI)-free anodic
oxides, J. Phys. Chem. C. 119 (2015) 19967–19975.
[44] F. Keller, M.S. Huntey, D.L. Robinson, Structural features of oxide coatings on
aluminium, J. Electrochem. Soc. 100 (1953) 411–419.
[45] M.K. Kushwaha, S. Anjan, S. Ray, Carbon nanotube/nanoﬁber embedded nano-
porous anodized aluminium oxide surface and its tribological properties, J. Nanosci.
Nanotech. 8 (2008) 4152–4157.
[46] J.P. Tu, C.X. Jiang, S.Y. Guoc, X.B. Zhaoa, M.F. Fu, Tribological properties of
aligned ﬁlm of amorphous carbon nanorods on AAO membrane in diﬀerent
environments, Wear 259 (2005) 759–764.
[47] C.J. Buchko, K.M. Kozloﬀ, D.C. Martin, Surface characterization of porous,
biocompatible protein polymer thin ﬁlms, Biomaterials 22 (2001) 1289–1300.
[48] W.J. Stępniowski, M. Michalska-Domańska, M. Norek, T. Czujko. Fast Fourier
transform based arrangement analysis of poorly organized alumina nanopores
formed via self-organized anodization in chromic acid. Mater. Lett. 117(2014)
69–73.
[49] Horcas,R. Fernández, J.M. Gómez-Rodríguez, J. Colchero, J. Gómez-Herrero,
A.M. Baro, WSXM: a software for scanning probe microscopy and a tool for
nanotechnology, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78 (2007) 013705.
[50] WSxM, http://www.nanotec.es (Last Accessed.


